Mathematical review — 2026-10-03

Scope and provenance
The attached task authorized a thorough mathematics/Lean/experiment audit,
repairs preserving the main claims, and no paper editing. Commit 4cb53fa
checkpointed the original working state before review; dade7ed records the first
replacement milestone. This was a solo review with a separate adversarial
self-review, not an independent review. No material downgrade is needed.

Current authority
review/current-theorem-coverage.json records the current exported declarations,
precise scopes, source hashes, and verification results. CheckTargets.lean checks
explicit target types independently of compiling their implementation modules.
CheckAxioms.lean checks transitive proof dependencies. Run:
  python3 scripts/run_mathematical_audit.py
The older T20–T44 metadata and token/schema validators have been retained and
explicitly marked as historical status claims/provenance, NOT proof certificates.
Their old 'direct' classifications do not establish former or current coverage.
The current theorem statement sheet points to the replacement proofs. Its closure
statement now takes the arbitrary current law at time zero, removing the ambiguous
reuse of an initial law at an arbitrary later time. Paper files are unchanged.

Eight main targets: premises -> derived content -> conclusion
1. NG_ARROW_DPI
   Finite normalized nonnegative real laws, a stochastic kernel, arbitrary initial
   law, deterministic pointwise observation, and any finite horizon. The KL
   definition uses Real.log with support mismatch giving +infinity; states occur
   once in Fintype sums. RealFiniteKL derives Gibbs nonnegativity and equality,
   the log-sum inequality, and extended-real deterministic DPI. RealMarkovPaths
   constructs normalized Markov path laws from the actual transition product;
   RealArrowDPI proves the map/reversal commutation and observed-arrow bound.
   No DPI field or path-reversal symmetry premise is supplied to this proof.

2. NG_PROTOCOL_TRAP
   Detailed balance pi(x) K(x,y)=pi(y) K(y,x), initialized at that pi, suffices.
   RealMarkovPaths proves reversal symmetry by an induction on the transition
   product, without division or cancellation of pi. It then proves zero honest
   observed KL for every deterministic lens and every horizon. Null-mass states
   are covered. Stationarity is implied by detailed balance and normalization.
   Ordered list equality is not used as equality of probability measures.

3. NG_FORCE_FOREST
   RealGraphExactness works on an actual SimpleGraph with IsAcyclic and real
   antisymmetric labels on edges. A root is selected in each connected component;
   actual unique paths give an edge identity for the resulting potential. The
   vertex type is not an encoded path and the label is not defined as a gradient.
   Conclusion: a(u,v)=phi(v)-phi(u) on EDGES. No off-edge identity is claimed.
   Finiteness can be dropped at no additional cost, strengthening the target.

4. NG_FORCE_NULL
   A real edge-local gradient telescopes on every legal closed graph walk.
   RealGraphExactness proves this without requiring exactness on nonedges and
   without restricting real labels to integers. Again finiteness is unnecessary.

5. NG_MACRO_CLOSURE_DEFICIT
   RealKLMixture derives the finite weighted mixture KL decomposition, minimizer,
   zero criterion, and positive mismatch gap. RealClosure constructs normalized
   conditional rows and defines CMI separately from the objective using the joint
   masses w(x)p_x(z), w(x), fiber mass W(f(x)), and pair mass R(f(x),z).
   It proves CMI equals the attained objective and is bounded by EVERY stochastic
   candidate kernel, including candidates with infinite objective. Two distinct
   positive-weight future rows in a common fiber imply strict positive CMI.
   Future rows are actual finite Markov future laws from dirac initial states.
   The current law is arbitrary; stationarity is not required. Zero-weight
   microstates do not enter support tests, and null macro fibers receive arbitrary
   normalized rows. RealClosureExamples realizes a genuinely positive instance.
   The expectation convention omits zero weights; it does not form 0 times +inf.

6. NG_OBJECT_CONTRACTIVE
   RealTVContraction defines TV=(1/2) sum |p-q| and the actual maximum row-TV
   Dobrushin coefficient of a real stochastic kernel on a nonempty finite space.
   It proves positivity, symmetry, triangle, zero iff laws equal, the event
   characterization, and contraction. The proof subtracts the MINIMUM event
   row, making signed negative contributions nonpositive; no contraction field
   is assumed. It derives TV(p,q)<=2 epsilon/(1-coefficient) from the two actual
   stability defects and proves uniqueness of stationary laws. RealTVExamples
   exercises genuine unequal laws and the theorem for all candidate laws.
   The supplementary existence/geometric convergence argument is analytically
   sound on the nonempty finite simplex: geometric increment tails are Cauchy,
   completeness gives a probability-law limit, continuity gives invariance, and
   contraction gives uniqueness and the stated geometric rate. Existence and
   convergence are not claimed as exported Lean declarations in this receipt.

7. NG_LADDER_IDEM
   The original Idempotence module already proves exactly the target: every
   positive iterate of any idempotent endomap on any carrier equals one step.
   No finite-domain hypothesis or example-specific restriction is needed.

8. NG_LADDER_BOUNDED_INTERFACE
   FiniteImageDefinability covers arbitrary domain/codomain with finite image.
   Its actual equivalence identifies ALL factoring Boolean predicates with
   assignments on Set.range f. It proves the exact cardinality 2^|range f| and
   rules out every injective Nat sequence, hence any strictly increasing chain
   of distinct predicates. Packaging/idempotence is not an extra premise.
   FiniteLensCardinality also bridges the older finite-lens API. Empty domains
   pose no exception: the image is empty and the unique predicate count is one.

Original proof/representation faults and repairs
- FiniteKLDPI's Rat-valued arbitrary log layer assumed deterministic DPI; its
  zero-log example did not instantiate real logarithms. Repeated supportList
  atoms double-counted aggregate state weights. The retained conditional score
  now weights list entries once and is explicitly labeled a legacy scaffold;
  all actual theorem coverage uses the concrete real replacement.
- ProtocolTrap previously assumed reversal symmetry instead of deriving it.
  A list law compared ordered entries rather than induced measures. The current
  proof derives semantic symmetry from pairwise detailed balance.
- Tree/forest scaffolds covered integer labels and path-bearing vertices rather
  than the stated graph. The replacements prove real, edge-local graph results.
- ClosureVariationalCore supplied its minimizer as a field; candidates were raw
  signed lists. ClosureDirectPack defined its 'deficit' as the best objective
  instead of establishing an independent CMI bridge, and assumed positivity.
  The replacement removes these assumptions and restricts rows to true laws.
- ContractionUniqueness correctly proves an auxiliary fact for a Nat-valued
  dissimilarity; it did not prove TV, Dobrushin, or the epsilon bound. The real
  module now supplies the full main target.
- Enumeration length alone did not prove cardinality/exhaustiveness, and a
  packaging-stabilization wrapper did not prove the arbitrary finite-image
  no-infinite-sequence statement. The new equivalence/cardinality proof does.
- Bare lake build originally succeeded with ZERO JOBS. A default library target
  now builds the whole root. mathlib/Lean v4.28.0 and dependencies are pinned.
- All retained native_decide proof shortcuts have been replaced by kernel
  reduction (decide +kernel). The current library has no holes, local axiom
  declarations, or native proof shortcuts. Exported main proofs depend only
  on propext, Classical.choice, and Quot.sound (or a subset).

Experiment and audit repairs
- Closure objective/CMI omit null microstates before checking support mismatch;
  an unused row with infinite KL cannot create a false infinite expectation.
- Probability entry points reject negative or unnormalized laws. A supplied
  stationary law must satisfy pi P=pi; the phase-lift audit checks full detailed
  balance instead of bidirected ratio exactness, which ignores one-way edges.
- The unique invariant-law solver uses actual stationary equations, not a count
  of fixed states. One fixed state plus a disjoint cycle has multiple extreme
  invariant laws. A two-cycle can have a unique invariant law despite coefficient
  one. Multiple extreme invariant laws give infinitely many mixture laws.
  Fixed state counts and fixed probability-law counts are explicitly separated.
- Matrix powers, paths, lags, and packaging iterations reject fractional counts
  and booleans. A fractional horizon formerly could recurse without termination.
- Graph cycle rank canonicalizes undirected edges before counting, so duplicate
  orientations cannot turn a tree into a cyclic graph. Duplicate vertex/row
  labels are rejected. Stochastic action conventions are validated explicitly.
- Direct lens/package constructors enforce their mathematical domains as well
  as the factories. Brute-force observation validates the initial law too.
- Both-infinite arrow divergences have no subtractive DPI gap; the optional gap
  audit rejects that case instead of using infinity minus infinity.
- Finite Decimal KL comparisons are explicitly uncertified diagnostics. Exact
  rational support/equality regimes remain exact. Ratio affinity magnitude is
  max(r,1/r)-1, not |log r|; this preserves vanishing and magnitude order only.
  Metric contexts distinguish bidirected affinity support from simple union
  support and fixed states from fixed distributions.
- Finite-grid stability counts, connected-cluster counts, sampled predicate
  rates, thresholded graphs, and fitted macro chains remain diagnostic objects.
  A constant suffix of a sampled signature sequence is not a future convergence
  certificate. Empty evidence-check lists cannot count as satisfied witnesses.
  The primitive coverage report explicitly states it is not a proof certificate.

Adversarial self-review
Rechecked the exported target types and helper definitions, rather than labels.
Checked zero weights, support mismatch/infinite KL, null fibers, null stationary
states, tau/horizon zero, one-way cycles, noncontractive unique invariant laws,
fixed-state/distribution separation, repeated edge orientations, edge-local
rather than global exactness, arbitrary domains with finite image, and an empty
lens image. Concrete positive/infinite KL and positive closure witnesses prevent
zero-score examples from standing in for the intended analytic objects.
No unresolved obstruction to any of the eight main theorem claims was found.

Paper corrections reserved for the later editing phase
The paper has deliberately NOT been updated. Apply these recorded repairs later:
1. appendix_a_probability_kl.tex, detailed-balance proof: replace the multiplication
   shortcut (extra interior pi factors, invalid cancellation at zero) by the
   division-free induction in RealMarkovPaths.
2. Same appendix, Dobrushin proof: choose the reference row minimizing P(y,A),
   or use normalized positive/negative signed parts; explicitly justify the
   signed inequality. The final estimate is valid.
3. appendix_c_variational_closure.tex: split off support-infinite cases before
   subtracting KL sums; omit zero-weight rows and define null-fiber rows freely.
4. Main closure statements: mu must be the CURRENT law at time t, or take t=0.
   Keeping an arbitrary initial law in a later-time weighted objective is false;
   the regression witness has positive deficit initially and zero after a step.
   The main strength is retained by the current-law formulation. Zero deficit
   concerns positive-mass rows, not all zero-mass states or uniform strong
   lumpability. Fiber mismatch remarks must include positive masses.
5. Finite stochastic memoryless observation channels commuting with reversal also
   satisfy DPI; merely leaving deterministic scope does not imply amplification.
6. Clarify nonempty state spaces for stationary-law existence, and distinguish
   multiplicative affinity surrogates from additive log-affinity magnitudes.
7. Formalization-status prose/tables must point to the concrete replacements;
   the old seven-direct/one-auxiliary labels are obsolete and were not evidence
   of the original analytic bridges. The current eight main targets are direct.

Verification
Baseline pytest: 236 passed, 14 failed, including absent-vision metadata and
paper/reproduce runners. The vision flags now reflect the absent file; no vision
file was fabricated. The paper/reproduce pipeline is excluded from this phase
because it writes manuscript/bundle artifacts. Current math/code and historical
schema tests are run separately; see review/python-tests.log. Fresh root build,
explicit target-type checks, source hashes, and transitive axiom checks are in
review/current-theorem-coverage.json, review/lean-build.log, review/target-check.log,
and review/axioms.txt. Test-generated legacy outputs are restored to their
historical contents with only explicit evidence-role annotations added.
